---
title: Everything Everywhere All At Once
subtitle: "Critical Rationalism as Guidance for Navigating the Multiverse of Trends in Software Development"
layout: post
tags: Culture Logic
---

<div class="flowers">
ðŸ¥¯
</div>

When educating ourselves as software developers, we face an abundance of books,
conference talks, youtube videos, and blog posts. The multitude of voices can be
overwhelming and makes it hard to identify a melody in this concerto with
neither sheet music nor a conductor.

Standing out from the sound carpet are some very sonorous voices, highlighting
opinionated points of view. Sometimes it is all too comforting to listen to
them: Finally, somebody who cut through the fog of uncertainty and knows what
needs to be done! Finally, there is the principle that will produce elegant,
clean code! Finally some clarity. Finally some orientation. What a relief! Let's
go and apply this principle everywhere.

After a year or two, or three, or five, the idea has aged -- rarely like wine,
and more often like milk -- and it gets replaced by another one. This cycle of
excitement and disappointment has little to do with the value of the idea, but
mostly with group dynamics and attention management.

With an inundating abundance of technical advice flooding the gates of our
attention, how can we decide which advice is worth following, and which should
better be ignored? It is easy to get lost and resort to a depressive cynicism:
Is there a thing such as meaning to be found in this tintinnabulation at all? Or
is it just a great white noise of nothingness? To not fall into cynicism we
might resort to conservatism: Perhaps we should just not be amongst the early
adopters? We better wait until time has proven a principle. Let others get
themselves a bloody nose when working at the bleeding edge of technological
development.

Both the cynical and the conservative strategy of dealing with the problem is
missing out on opportunity. We lack a _critical_ tool, a tool to tell sense from
nonsense. With this, we could reap the benefits of adopting better ideas
earlier. This applies not only to individual decision making, but also to the
software development industry as a whole.

But how can we tell whether an idea is good or not without having tested it?
This is a classical question from an ancient discipline called _logic_. Logic
does not help to prove that a statement is correct, and thus cannot replace the
test against experience. But at least it helps with identifying arguments which
are flawed. By applying logic, we can filter out a lot of ideas early on and
thus spare us some pain in gathering experience.

This post is a short logical inquiry into how to tell some of the most prominent
patterns of people trying to sell you a technological nothing burger. It is
basically an application of the theory of Critical Rationalism to the problem.

The main idea of Critical Rationalism is to reject ideas if they cannot be
tested. This can be applied to a lot of ideas circulating in software
development technology discussions.

The core insight is that there are statements which are testable and other
statements which are not. The ones which are not testable but logically flawed,
are simply wrong. The ones which are not testable but logically correct are
sometimes called "logical tautologies", sometimes "analytical truths". They are
always true, regardless of how experience is going to materialize. That is why
they do not communicate anything about the "world".

> <p class="emphasis">Analytical Truths are Meaningless</p>

Whenever somebody makes a statement which is an analytical truth, they are
making words without communicating their experience. Analytical truths are
meaningless.

Here is an example:

> When applying this principle X, you have to make sure you don't apply it too
> much.

This statement is simply true, and it is so regardless the idea we are supposed
to apply. Its truth lies in the meaning of the word _too_. Doing something too
much is inadvisable, because this is what _too much_ means. What we would need
to know to turn this sentence into a meaningful one is: how much is too much?

Every principle has limits. Every decision is a trade-off. Every decision should
depending on context. Most software developers have understood that. Few people
will be taken serious claiming they have found a solution which can be applied
regardless of context and which has no downsides.

But saying "Apply this principle based on your specific trade-offs", "When
applying this pattern, take the context into account" (and so on) does not mean
anything. Nonetheless, these statements can be found in a lot of talks, blog
posts and books.

> <p class="emphasis">"It depends" is an answer to any question and yet to no
> question at all.</p>

Value lies in answering the hard questions: _What_ are the limits of this idea?
_What_ context information do we have to take into account? _What_ does it
depend on? _Which_ are the trade-offs? And even more specific: _How_ can we
assess the weights in these trade-offs?

The interpretation assuming best intentions from the speaker making an
analytical true claim would be that they believe they have an idea at the tip of
their tongue but they struggle getting it out there. Asking those questions will
either help them communicate the experience they have in mind or will show that
they don't actually know what they want to say.

Hulling one's statement into a tautological wrapper is a strategy of
_self-immunizing_ the claim. It means the claim cannot be proven wrong anymore.
This comes at the cost of depriving the claim of its meaning.

When writing or presenting an idea, make sure you ask these questions and try to
answer them. It is hard. Often you might find out that you have nothing to tell,
really. In other cases you will find that pursuing these questions will sharpen
your idea and make the experience you want to talk about accessible to your
audience.

When listening to other people, listen carefully whether they actually make a
statement that you know how to apply to your problems. If that remains unclear,
because they resort to tautological statements, ask them for examples. With
their examples, can you answer some of the hard questions together? If not, it
is a good idea to discard their advice.
